                        Model Change Bulletin

                                MCB#1                       03/11/2011

                        AERSCREEN (dated 11060)

This Model Change Bulletin (MCB) documents changes made to the AERSCREEN 
screening model.  A brief description of the changes is provided below. 
Additional details are available in the FORTRAN source code and in 
the AERSCREEN user's guide.


This revised version of AERSCREEN (dated 11060) includes the following
modifications relative to the previous version (BETA1):

Bug Fixes

1.  Modified subroutine MAKEGRID for REFINE AERMOD run to correct an
    error in calculating y-receptor coordinates for the fence line 
    receptor for rectangular area sources.  The y-coordinate in the beta 
    version of AERSCREEN was set to zero and not calculated based on 
    the diagonal of maximum concentration from FLOWSECTOR output.
    
2.  Modified subroutine CHECKANSWER to also check responses that 
    requires a numeric answer in addition to responses that require a 
    character response (not including responses that are 
    filenames). CHECKANSWER is called with a flag denoting if the 
    response is supposed to be character or numeric.  If response is to
    be a character answer, CHECKANSWER checks the character string for
    all blanks.  For numeric responses, CHECKANSWER checks the response
    for any non-numeric characters, excluding the letter E, plus sign,
    dashes, and periods.  CHECKANSWER also checks the response for 
    placement of characters to ensure that is a number.  This change to 
    CHECKANSWER ensures that if a non-numeric response is entered for a 
    numeric response, AERSCREEN will not abnormally abort but will
    tell the user that an invalid response was entered and re-prompt for
    a response.  CHECKANSWER does not check to see if numeric is 
    reasonable in regards to variable (i.e., CHECKANSWER does not check
    for negative emission rate).

3.  Created subroutine CHECKLINE to read the data lines in 
    AERSCREEN.INP.  CHECKLINE reads the data lines to ensure that all
    fields are present in the file and calls CHECKANSWER to ensure
    that numeric fields are indeed numeric.  If CHECKLINE finds missing
    data or invalid data, AERSCREEN notifies the user and stops 
    processing.  CHECKLINE does not check to see if numeric is 
    reasonable in regards to variable (i.e., CHECKLINE does not check
    for negative emission rate).

4.  AERSCREEN now checks for the presence of demlist.txt when reading
    inputs from AERSCREEN.INP or prompts and terrain is being used.  
    If demlist.txt is not present, AERSCREEN alerts the user and stops 
    processing. 
    
5.  When reading demlist.txt file location of NADGRIDs file, AERSCREEN
    checks to see if a a "\" is at the end of the folder path in case
    users forget to add "\" to complete file pathname.  If "\" is not
    at the end of the pathname, AERSCREEN will add it.  In the beta
    version of AERSCREEN, if the "\" was not at the end of the pathname
    in demlist.txt AERSCREEN stopped processing.

6.  Added a logical variable, fixdum, when reading data from 
    AERSCREEN.INP.  This variable is used when reading rectangular
    or circular area sources.  For rectangular area sources, this
    variable is set to true when the rotation angle is non-zero. The
    rotation angle should always be zero.  For circular area sources, 
    this variable is set to true when the number of vertices, NVERT, 
    is not 20.  The number of vertices should always be 20. If fixdum 
    is true, AERSCREEN alerts the user and stops processing.

7.  For point sources, if stack temperature is negative, AERSCREEN
    interprets this as a stack-ambient temperature difference.
    Subroutines VALIDATE, WRITETOLOG, and OUTPUT have been modified
    to express this as a temperature difference.
    
8.  Changed logic in subroutines READINP and STACKS for volume sources
    and ambient distances from "less than or equal" to "less than".

9.  Corrected format error when reading terrain files that are in
    quotation marks in subroutine READDEM.

10. Initialize variables before processing data via prompts.  Emissions
    data are initialized to zero in subroutine READINP before reading
    AERSCREEN.INP

11. Corrected file checking in subroutine OLDMAP, so that quotations
    do not affect checking.  In beta version of AERSCREEN, if filename
    is entered in quotations in one AERSCREEN run but not in another,
    absence of quotations would trigger AERSCREEN to rerun AERMAP,
    when in fact, same file was being used.

12.  In subroutine READINP, make sure all data lines present, i.e.
     source data, building data, terrain data, meteorological data,
     discrete receptor use line, miscellaneous data, and output filename.
     If source data, building data, terrain data, meteorological data,
     or miscellaneous data is missing, AERSCREEN will notify the user
     and stop processing.  If the discrete receptor use line is missing,
     AERSCREEN will assume no discrete receptors.  If the output filename
     line is missing, AERSCREEN will use the default AERSCREEN.OUT filename.
      
13.  In subroutine READINP, now check to make sure emissions line is
     before building, terrain, and miscellaneous data lines.  Because
     of logic used in READINP, source type must be known before other
     data requirements.  If emissions line is not before building,
     terrain, or miscellaneous data, AERSCREEN alerts user and stops
     processing.

14.  Changed input probe distance units from kilometers to meters.

15.  Probe distance is checked to see if it is a multiple of 25.  If
     not, the probe distance is reset to the next multiple of 25 that
     is higher than the current probe distance.  The user is notified
     of the change. The change is made because receptor spacings may
     be multiples of 25 m.
     
16.  Changed receptor spacing methodology for probe distances greater
     than 5 km.  Between 0 and 5 km, receptor spacing is 25 m.  Past
     5 km, the spacing is calculated as the difference between the probe
     distance and 5 km divided by 100 receptors.  If the result is
     less than 25 m, then the spacing is reset to 25 m and the number
     of receptors past 5 km is reset based on 25 m spacing.  This
     change in methodology was to ensure that a receptor was
     located at the probe distance.
 
17.  AERSCREEN now checks surface characteristics for reasonable values.
     If any value of albedo is negative or greater than 1.0, AERSCREEN
     alerts the users and stops processing.  Surface roughness is 
     checked for values less than 0.001 or greater than 2.0 m.  If 
     surface roughness is positive but less 0.001 m, AERSCREEN resets
     the value to 0.001 m and alerts the user.  AERSCREEN continues
     processing.  If the surface roughness exceeds 2.0 m, AERSCREEN
     alerts the user but uses the entered values.  If the absolute
     value of Bowen ratio exceeds 10, AERSCREEN alerts the user
     but continues processing.

18.  AERSCREEN checks surface characteristics files for reasonable
     values and to make sure the files are correctly formatted.
     AERSCREEN checks that there are values for each temporal period/
     spatial sector combination.  If the file is incorrectly formatted,
     AERSCREEN alerts the user and stops processing.
     
19.  AERSCREEN warns the user if entered ambient temperatures are less
     than 183 K or greater than 331 K.  These are representative of 
     current world record temperatures.  AERSCREEN will not stop
     processing but use the entered temperatures unless the user
     changes them.

20.  If changing the ambient temperatures from the options list in
     subroutine metdata and the user wishes to use defaults (option 1),
     AERSCREEN will automatically reset the temperatures and the user
     will not be shown the prompt to set to defaults.

21.  AERSCREEN now includes the DOMAINXY keyword on the AERMAP.INP file
     created by subroutine FLOWSECTOR or REFINE.  The DOMAINXY keyword
     speeds up processing by allowing AERMAP to not have to use the 
     entire set of terrain files listed in demlist.txt.  In FLOWSECTOR,
     DOMAINXY is set to 1.1 times the probe distance and in REFINE,
     DOMAINXY is set to 1.1 times the maximum distance being
     processed in REFINE.
     
22.  Source elevation included in the validation page, even when
     terrain is not used.
     
23.  If the NAD datum option is not 1 or 4 or non-numeric, AERSCREEN  
     will alert the user and re-prompt the user for the NAD when 
     entering data from the prompts or stop processing if data is 
     entered using the AERSCREEN.INP file.
     
24.  If the UTM zone is zero or less or non-numeric, AERSCREEN
     will alert the user and re-prompt the user for the UTM zone when 
     entering data from the prompts or stop processing if data is  
     entered using the AERSCREEN.INP file.
     
25.  AERSCREEN alerts the user if the source UTM coordinates are
     x=0 and y=0 if terrain is used.

26.  Added space between user albedo and Bowen ratio to accommodate
     negative Bowen ratios.
     
27.  If user is changing terrain from no to yes using prompts, AERSCREEN
     checks the UTM zone and NAD option.  If values are invalid
     AERSCREEN automatically prompts for correct values.  UTM zone
     is only checked when input coordinates are UTM coordinates.

28.  If building downwash is set to no, the user cannot change 
     parameters using the options list.  The user cannot change
     building parameters if downwash is set to yes and an BPIPPRM input
     file is being used.  

29.  If downwash is initially no and all building parameters are zero
     and the user changes downwash to yes using the options list and 
     hits return to return to the validation page, AERSCREEN checks 
     the building parameters for valid values and if any values are 
     invalid, the user is prompted for new values.

30.  Added a new subroutine, CHECKBPIP, to ensure BIPPRM input file
     is correctly formatted for AERMOD.  CHECKBPIP checks to make sure
     the process flag is set to 'P' for PRIME downwash and that only
     one stack is included in the input file.  If reading data
     from the AERSCREEN.INP and the file is not correctly formatted,
     AERSCREEN alerts the user and stops processing.  If entering
     the filename from the prompts, AERSCREEN will re-prompt for
     the filename if the file is incorrectly formatted.
     
31.  Changed processing in subroutine GETDEM, to check for complete
     text string "LATLON" or "UTM" when entering coordinates.
     
32.  Changed receptor coordinates in maximum concentration file and 
     AERSCREEN.OUT to be 2 places past the decimal.

33.  Change subroutine MAKEGRID so that receptor coordinates matched
     those output by AERMAP.
     
34.  Logical variables used in subroutine CHECKDAT now part of module 
     MAIN1 and included in subroutine READINP.  Added logical variables
     fixsurf and fixclim for the surface code and moisture code.
     
35.  Added warning in subroutines VALIDATE and WRITETOLOG if stack
     exit velocity reset to 1E-05.
     
36.  Added variable istage2 used in subroutine AERMAPQA.  Istage2 is
     used as a counter for ierr2.  If istage = 0 (source elevation  
     calculation) then istage2=1, otherwise istage2=istage.
     
37.  Variable ipass, used to denote if data from AERSCREEN.INP is used,
     now part of module MAIN1.

38.  Corrected terrain options list in subroutine GETDEMs for cases
     that do not use terrain.  Correction is to source elevation option
     so that it reads "Source elevation input (user entered or zero)"
     instead of "Source elevation input (user entered or AERMAP)" since
     AERMAP is not used for flat cases.

39.  Changed AERMOD, MAKEMET, BPIPPRM, and AERMAP executable checks
     to be non-fatal warnings if not found in current folder. If not
     found, AERSCREEN prompts user for location and they are copied
     to current folder.  Checks are now done in subroutine VALIDATE.
     BPIPPRM and AERMAP checks are only done if downwash or terrain
     are being used.

40.  Changed prompts that require a y or n to be lowercase for both
     y and n to avoid confusion that capital N was a default.

41.  In the case AERMAP is unsuccessful and there is no error message
     AERSCREEN issues the message to check source coordinates and that
     they may not be located in the terrain file(s).
     
42.  Corrected references to "FLOWVECTOR" and changed to "FLOWSECTOR."

43.  Changed references to "BPIP" in write statements to "BPIPPRM."
            
Enhancements

1.  User can specify output filename, other than default AERSCREEN.OUT.
    If user specifies a filename other than AERSCREEN.OUT, AERSCREEN
    checks to make sure the filename is valid, either checking for
    its existence or that the pathname of the file exists.  Output
    filenames cannot be AERSCREEN.LOG and must have an ".OUT" extension.
    If AERSCREEN.OUT is not used as the filename, the 
    max_conc_distance.txt file is renamed using the path and file prefix
    of the output file.  AERSCREEN also copies the new version of 
    AERSCREEN.INP to a file with the output filename's prefix and an
    ".inp" extension.  AERSCREEN.LOG is also copied to a file with
    the output file's prefix and an ".log" extension. The copy of the
    log file does not occur if the user stops AERSCREEN processing
    in the VALIDATE subroutine.

2.  The user can include up to 10 discrete receptor distances using
    a simple text file of distances, one distance per line.  The
    first line must contain the text "units: " followed by a units
    descriptor:  meters, km, kilometers, kilo-meters, feet, ft, or miles.
    If the units line is not found or invalid units indicated, AERSCREEN
    will alert the user.  If processing data from AERSCREEN.INP, 
    AERSCREEN will stop processing.  If processing data from the 
    prompts, AERSCREEN will re-prompt for a filename.  If the units line 
    is found but no units are listed, AERSCREEN will assume units of 
    meters.  AERSCREEN does not include receptors with distances less than
    the entered ambient distance or receptors with distances greater than
    the probe distance.  Receptors with distances already part of the 
    automatic array are also not included.  New subroutine, CALCREC
    created to calculate receptor network, including discrete receptors.

3.  AERSCREEN will process NOx to NO2 chemistry using PVMRM or OLM.  The
    user must specify either PVMRM or OLM, the NO2/NOx in stack ratio, and
    a representative ozone concentration.  This can be done using the prompts
    in the source parameters prompts list, or by including the appropriate
    parameters in the CO PATHWAY of the AERSCREEN.INP file.

Miscellaneous

1.  When using a non-default name for AERSCREEN output file, write to 
    screen at end of processing new input and log filenames.      